we were born to run so some of us though
that statement might feel a little far
from the truth as running doesn't come
naturally to all of us however it's
something we were never actually taught
so whether you're completely new to
running or maybe you're a runner who's
not happy with their gate today i'm
going to be taking it back to basics and
revisiting how to actually run
it's usually fairly obvious to spot a
poor running gate and what is going
wrong but when it comes to good runners
it's much harder to see exactly what
they are doing so today i'm going to be
breaking down the movement patterns of
the running gate and explaining exactly
how to perform them correctly as well as
giving you some tips to get going
before we actually start moving we need
to address how you stand as your posture
will carry over onto your running and
you might have flashbacks from school
being told to stand up right well
obviously running is a fluid movement
but still having your head held high and
shoulders nice and open your tummy
tucked in and your hips facing forwards
is going to help so you want to picture
having a line that dissects your body it
goes up from your feet so through your
ankles your knees up through your hips
dissecting your shoulders and then your
ears and you want to maintain that line
when you start running although you're
going to have a slight forward tilt so
the line is basically coming up at a
forward angle from the ground
let's now address the specific parts of
your body and how they should move so
we're going to start off with the feet
and the ankles when you're walking you
land with a heel strike with your leg
out in front of you and your leg nice
and straight but as soon as you start
running the force that's going through
your bones and your joints is greatly
increased so you do want to make sure
you've got a slight soft knee there's a
very slight bend in it making sure it's
not fully extended and as to where your
foot lands on the ground well that is
eternally open to debate and it's
something that i suggest you experiment
with yourself but having a midfoot foot
plant actually does help with some shock
absorption and it'll also help encourage
you to have a better body position but
it goes hand in hand because as you
start running and you start to implement
that forward tilt we've already talked
about you'll find it more easy to land
with a mid foot strike as well
sticking with your feet you also need to
address where your foot lands in
relation to your body and it's really
common to see people over striding so
basically landing on their heel with
their foot way out in front so a little
bit like the walking action but when it
comes to running this is pretty much
acting like a break so you're putting
your foot down out in front of you and
then having to move your body over and
it's also really jarring on the body so
ideally you want your foot to be landing
underneath your body whilst it's already
started to move backwards and a good
drill to just get awareness of your foot
landing underneath your body is simply
running on the spot
there are a couple of old school on the
spot drills which will really help with
the points that we've been covering so
first of all high knees i expect most of
you understand what i mean by this one
but you are simply jogging on the spot
you're going to start off by just
bringing your knees halfway up to hip
height i'm really focusing on landing on
your mid foot and keeping that time on
the ground really short so short contact
time and nice and springy off the ground
once you've mastered that then try to
bring it up to full hip height so
basically getting your knees up to 90
degrees or your hips up to a 90 degree
angle and then take plenty of rest just
try and do this for 10 to 15 seconds
because if you're doing it well it will
be hard and then you need to look at the
other end of your running stride so your
bottom activation and some with some
butt kicks so you're simply going to
place your hands behind your bottom and
you're going to start off by trying to
flick your heels up towards your hands
just sort of halfway to start with and
this one you really need to focus on
keeping a good posture because it's
quite easy to start to lean forwards but
as a result it will be quite easy to
naturally land on your midfield or even
your forefoot and then progress this
actually touching your hands with your
heels and once you've got these mastered
really concentrate on keeping posture
throughout and staying nice and upright
because it is easy to cheat but
obviously that's going to then you know
not get the point of the drill and then
finally once you're ready you can start
to progress this to moving forward so
covering a distance of say 15 to 20
meters and then just jog back from
recovery
a common cue from running coaches is to
hear them say run tall well it acts in
the same way as standing tall so you put
your shoulders back and you
automatically tuck your tummy in and i
bet you've done that without even
realizing and these cues are great for
making you look good when you're
standing and running but we're not
focusing on that today we want you to be
running more easily and it will have a
knock-on effect because tucking your
tummy in isn't actually going to rotate
your pelvis slightly posteriorly so
basically bringing your hips up towards
your chest and that's going to then make
it much easier to lift your knees when
you're running
your hips are essential for all of your
running propulsion and we talked about
the front of the hip so the knee drive
coming forwards but we also need to look
at the posterior chain so what happens
at the back and when you're running you
need to have good extension in your leg
as your body moves over your foot and if
that's restricted then you're going to
be restricting your stride length so you
need to make sure you've got strong
glutes that are firing because that's
the powerhouse your bottom muscles but
also that your hips aren't too tight so
that you can get that full running
propulsion from each stride
moving up to your shoulders ideally you
want these to remain as relaxed as
possible because if they come too tense
or bunched up around your ears then
you're going to find it much harder to
breathe but also just restricting your
overall movement and any movement that
comes at the shoulder should be a result
of your arms moving forwards not as a
result of your shoulders actually
forcing that movement
[Music]
your arms are actually there to help you
run more easily so if you think about
the forwards and backwards motion of
your arms actually driving and
propelling you forwards and there's
actually a diagonal link from the
opposite shoulder and arm through to the
opposite hip so connected through your
torso and because of this yes your
shoulders are working but you still need
to keep them nice and relaxed and you
want to have a bit of a gentle bend at
your elbow so keeping them in close to
your torso when it comes to your hands
they need to be relaxed as well so you
don't want them super clenched you don't
want them poker straight but just
somewhere in the middle in a relaxed
finger bend in this relaxed position you
want your arms to slowly be moving
forwards and backwards keeping them
close to your torso is any movement that
goes across your body it's just going to
be counterproductive and you'll have to
correct that with your legs so you can
actually practice this on the spot now
so you might sound silly but if you just
stand still and you have your arms and
you're just simply going to pump them
forwards and backwards concentrating on
keeping your shoulders relaxed you can
even do it in front of the mirror and
then if you take one foot in front of
the other and so you're in a partial
running stance and practice it again for
10 arm pumps and then swap onto the
other side for another 10. and obviously
when you're actually running you're not
going to have to physically think about
your arms so much because they will move
more naturally with the running gate but
to just prove how much your arms do
assist your running i want you to have a
little go at going out for a run and
sticking your hands to your thighs so
running with your arms by your side a
little bit like a penguin and then go
back to normal running and you'll really
feel the benefit of what your arms do
[Music]
last but no means least is your head and
with it being such a heavy structure its
position can have a serious knock-on
effect on your running and remember that
line i talked about at the beginning
your head needs to remain in line with
the rest of your body because if it's
too far forwards or it's looking down
then you'll find it really hard to lift
your knees up at the front of your
running gate if it's the opposite and
you'll find it's too far back then it's
going to cause you to heal strike and
over stride so also too much excessive
movement you really want to try to
reduce or keeping it on one side because
anything you're doing with your head
your body's just going to have to
compensate and it'll end up having to
work harder so a good way to get your
head in the right position is to sort of
think about your head think about your
eye line so make sure you're looking
nice and far ahead as that will
naturally keep your shoulders back and
it will help you keep your hips up as
well
i can't believe i've actually got this
far and not address breathing but it is
quite hard to have it as a separate
section as it's obviously involved in
every movement of running and if you're
getting it wrong then it can have a
negative effect on your run yes it
sounds simple we all know how to breathe
and after all we have got this far but
you might not actually be breathing
correctly for your running and signs
could be having really tense shoulders
or seeing tension in your face and your
neck and when you are breathing you need
to utilize your full lung capacity for
running so that means breathing more
than purely from your rib cage so let's
have a look at where you're at at the
moment so for this you need to just take
a lie down a moment and just breathe
normally whilst placing your hand on
your belly if your hand isn't moving
then it indicates you're only doing
shallow breaths so try to focus on
filling all of your lungs with air right
to the bottom of them and this will see
your belly move outwards or upwards
underneath your hand on the in-breath
and then as you breathe out your hand
should fall away just have a feel and
get used to doing this whilst you're
lying still and then take it up to
standing and again place your hand on
your belly to get the feel and you might
find that actually doing some simple
breathing exercises before running will
help to remind you to stay relaxed but
also to fully utilize that lung capacity
and finding the correct footwear is
important when running especially if
you're looking at altering your gait and
for this i would recommend heading to a
specialist running store so they can
ensure you've got a shoe that suits your
running style but also fits properly and
then finally a bit of strengthening you
need to make sure you've really work on
straightening your core and the muscles
around your hips as that enables you to
keep that good posture we've talked
about for far longer which in turn makes
running much easier and makes you more
efficient so if you're maybe having a
play around with your gate or changing
anything at the moment do let us know
you can do that in the comments section
below and check out all of our other
social media channels and whilst you're
there give us a like and a follow
